the new york times
has now done in the year 2021
what canada's public broadcasters
what canada's private sector
broadcasters have failed to do
for decades they have made the question
of the 20th century's forced
assimilation
and genocide of indigenous people
matter
there's a detail in the midst of the new
podcast the new york times put out
just yesterday that i think will catch
many american listeners by surprise
many european listeners by surprise and
so on
probably many administrators at the
united nations
many people whose whole careers are in
the field of human rights law
a lot of those people live in new york
city because the united nations across
new york city
a lot of them will be caught by
surprised when they hear
the anecdote of a newborn baby
being incinerated in an oven
oh well all of a sudden this starts to
sound like
the holocaust well of course
scenario is much more different than the
holocaust
then that description might at first
suggest the oven
in question was a furnace used to heat a
building
wasn't a concentration camp it was a
school
you can get into all kinds of details to
differentiate the two however
the new york times has reported as never
before
that canada's so-called system of
residential schools
did involve putting people
into ovens that it did involve
putting dead bodies into unmarked graves
that it did involve cutting holes in the
ice
on the surface of a river to stuff
corpses
into the water where they would never be
seen
again oh
the title of this video is everybody
knew
and we're going to talk a little bit
about what i mean by everybody
and what it means to know
when i was a child i remember my father
frankly freaked out in response to
a news story um hi guys so i
am willing to uh chitchat with people in
the audience but i do have a lot to say
as you can imagine so welcome to the
show and thank you for the donation
anyone has a salient or frankly question
i'll be i'll be happy enough to get to
it
um in due course
i remember my father freaked out over
what was basically a news story
about a black and white photograph taken
in germany
during the nazi era and
i forget what point of the photograph
was i
was showing some event or maybe just
even a family posing in front of their
shop or something
but the photograph captured graffiti in
the background
so you know graffiti written on a wall
of a city somewhere in germany
and if you zoomed in on the details of
graffiti you could see in german
that someone had written that
jews deserve to be put into
a particular concentration camp that was
written
on the wall and my father flipped out at
this
because he said don't you realize this
is evidence
that they knew that the germans knew
that everybody knew
that whoever wrote this graffiti and
whoever was seeing this graffiti going
down the
street they knew the significance of the
name of that concentration camp they
knew the significance
of people being put into the
concentration camp and so on
now this reflects i mean my father grew
up very much in the post-war
era it reflects the very strange mix
of naivete and cynicism he had his whole
life
but i remember saying to him you know
barry
i did not call him dad i called the vice
versa
said you know barry have you ever sat
down
and tried to work out an estimate of how
many
people were employed at these
concentration camps
and at these extermination camps and you
have to go beyond
just the staff who were on site like
what about the people who were driving
trucks
back and forth to them to provide them
with food and provisions you have to
kind of
work out your estimate a bit for how
many people really involved
on a day-to-day basis or on a once per
month
basis and have you looked at where the
staff
lived and where their kids went to
school and so on
like they weren't completely isolated
from the rest of german society
and of course beyond above and beyond
that you can look at
how these issues were actually
represented even within the nazi party
itself um i think it's a gross
misconception
to imagine that the holocaust was a
secret
it wasn't even a secret in a book
written by adolf hitler
called mein kampf it's just ridiculous
to pretend
how could people at the time have read
mein kampf and voted for adolf hitler
and supported this party
and and they just really weren't clear
on what
what the plan was with these
concentration camps like
you know my father wasn't kidding i
think his whole generation
they grew up with this really sick
justification
for why we had switched from being such
uh
dire enemies of the germans to suddenly
being their allies
you know i mean like the alliance with
west germany against east germany and
russia it's so rapid
and the convenient excuse was well they
didn't know
nobody knew like it was a secret i mean
how
again just you know what i challenged
how can you be
so naive and then conversely if you
actually believe this
was a secret like in the same sense that
like a cia operation is top secret
why would this why would this piece of
graffiti you know
put the lie to that now a totally
different side of the world totally
different episode totally different
ethical
issues involved i've dealt with that
again and again when americans talk
about the bombing of laos
being a secret war
you know american foreign policy in laos
and cambodia
it's like i can show you right now a
film clip
of richard nixon giving a press
conference
standing in front of a map of laos
pointing to it
same with cambodia see like i can show
you the page in richard nixon's
autobiography
where he's talking with us how can you
possibly perceive something
that was openly presented and discussed
at white house
press conferences covered in the
newspapers and so on how and you know
something that was the
the subject of public protest marches
you know in new york city in washington
and definitely in ottawa canada
definitely toronto i mean to say we had
them too
how how can you say this was a secret a
secret war
what does that mean what are we doing
ethically
intellectually or even philosophically
in disclaiming
that we didn't know you know now this
this latter
issue uh this latter example relates
back to
the first one the main topic of this
video in a dynamic way
my parents knew all about vietnam
my parents knew all about cambodia my
parents
knew all about the bombing of laos
they didn't care about first nations
why to my parents by the way
my father ethnically white my mother
ethnically jewish both of them born and
raised
in canada both of them university
educated
what would have been harder for them to
know about
and which issue would it have been
harder or easier for them
to make a decisive difference
in public policy on sorry that's a
convoluted sense
like really from where my parents were
living in canada
what difference can they possibly make
in the history of vietnam and history or
cambodian history of laos right what
does their opinion matter
what can they do but what can they know
about
what can they do about the cree the
ojibwe
the mohawk the dna the inuit canada's
first nations people
and then think about also the span of my
parents lives how many years did they
care about
vietnam was it five years was it ten
years
was it fifteen years i don't know maybe
it was five years you know what i mean
it's it should really matter the
potential for them to make a difference
you know for just one tribe or for all
indigenous people again over 50 years
over 70 years they
live long lives right
and those issues really are decided in
ottawa to a lesser extent in toronto and
montreal
you know what cities in canada the fate
of vietnam
cambodia and laos right we have nothing
to do
my parents could have known about what
was happening
in canada's residential schools they
could have known what was happening in
our process
of force assimilation and genocide right
they could have known because i knew
[Laughter]
i could really say that and it was a
huge divide between us
they could have known they could have
cared
and they didn't
and why
share with everyone in the audience uh
wicked energy thanks me for my response
to foot soldiers video well
thanks it's nice to know nice to know
someone appreciate it
um i'm happy to pause every so often and
we'll respond to your questions if you
guys have anything to say on topic it's
also great if you guys want to hit the
thumbs up
we'll have more people join the audience
while the broadcast is ongoing that is
really the only difference that it makes
more thumbs up means that basically
my video gets advertised more to people
who already subscribe to my channel or
have already been to my channel anyway
it doesn't really doesn't advertise it
to complete strangers
it's not the reality of how youtube
works in 2021
so the new york times related an
anecdote
about a newborn baby being put into an
oven and incinerated
it's not the first anecdote of that kind
i've heard this is a
practice that happened
at first nations residential schools
indian schools
operated by the government to my
knowledge
again and again i remember
a detailed account which came from
one of the women who put the baby in the
oven
so she was there as a direct witness at
that moment
and she stated that the particular baby
she put in the oven
was the product of one of the teachers
raping one of the students
that's the kind of thing you'd have to
live with for quite some time presumably
the student gets pregnant
and she's then on the school campus
continually for something like nine
months
you know like it's not really something
that can be hidden in the crowded social
context of a school where everyone is
sleeping and eating their meals
on the same campus and then one day the
baby is born
and then the baby disappears and from
the perspective of this particular woman
she knows what happens to the baby
because she was in the furnace room
uh when that event transpired
i don't think there ever was an order
given out from the government of canada
and i don't think there was a
plan by either the catholic church or
the anglican church
where they sent out orders saying yeah
yeah yeah go ahead
rape the students and if they get
pregnant incinerate
the babies i don't think so i think that
what you had
was a culture that developed
amongst the teachers and administrators
where certain practices certain coping
methods
came to be known came to be accepted
and came to be shared whether those were
in whispers or conversations or written
letters
from one campus to the next from one
administrator to the next the use of
chains the use of metal shackles
the use of whipping in public the use of
forced labor for long hours
the use of starvation the use
of intentional transmission
of disease killing students by locking
them in a room where they would die
of a contagious disease where they would
contract the contagious disease
perhaps nearly die but in many cases
actually die
the use of eugenic procedures
to render students permanently
infertile okay
all of this has been documented
all of it has been known
by people like me who have no inside
source information
i'm going to talk about how much i knew
as a child in the 1990s in just a moment
but
nine years ago i was more involved with
first nations politics than i am now
i was studying cree in ojibwe at a
university
it's called first nations university
supposedly the best place to do this in
canada
it's an absolutely terrible place to do
this don't study there it's a disaster
of institution
but anyway i was studying the languages
and i was involved with and following
the politics the significance then
and there was this guy real eccentric
who went out with a dosing rod
to try to find dead bodies on the campus
of one of these residential schools
now if you don't know what dosing means
i don't blame you we have several people
here for whom english is not their first
language
so i will put this in quotation marks
d-o-w-s-i-n-g this is some ancient
ancient english slang so dosing is
do you know what does it mean well
dosing is an
old-fashioned kind of
it's an aspect of witchcraft i suppose
um
where people would hold a stick a wooden
stick normally a y-shaped stick
from a tree and they would close their
eyes
and walk holding the stick and they
would be able to
feel for example where water was passing
beneath the surface
of the earth so someone in the audience
knows the term dosing it
really it just depends how much like
17th century literature you've read or
something yeah
it goes back a few centuries so dosting
was a technique used for different kinds
of supernatural
shall we say now in this case
they they were dousing for dead bodies
so this guy and he was i mean
a genuine advocate for an activist for
first nations people but eccentric
goes out with the dowsing rod and a team
of people
they walk through one of the orchards
that's on the campus
of one of these residential schools now
the orcs cells are more significant than
you might think
look at the actual schedule these kids
were living on being woken up in the
morning and forced to do hard labor
very often the orchards so on that was a
big part of their
quote unquote education was that they
were really being starved
and worked in this way with forced labor
anyway so they're going through the
orchard with this dosing rod and through
whatever
preternatural cognition you know the
person holding the dose drone says
there big there
they get out the shovel in the spade
they dig through the earth
lo and behold there is the body of a
child
tried to make a news story out of this
and aside from
very small very obscure first nations
publications and websites nobody wanted
to carry it
you know it's not on the nbc news it's
not on cbs it's not on
the bbc it's not on the cbc it's not on
local
canadian workers this was i wouldn't
even say it was buried
but at that time just nine years ago any
discourse of this kind was not being
covered
by the mainstream press at all it was in
a really obscure
political publications that i was
following but almost nobody else was
nine years ago and i think also just the
eccentricity of this
this guy this activist probably freaked
out some of the major girls
now i did not respond to this by
becoming a true believer
in the magical practice of dowsing
my comment on the time pardon me my
comment at the time
partly cynical reflecting the fact that
i'm an atheist and a skeptic and so on
and partly just well informed by my
knowledge of historical circumstances
was
have you considered the possibility that
if they put down the shovel and the
spade
anywhere in that orchard they would have
found another dead body
we just had the finding of over 200 dead
bodies
on one of these school campuses and
there is a not so supernatural
explanation for the fact that they knew
where to dig
because they were told just in terms of
the oral history they were told by
people who lived there and worked there
whereabouts generally the dead bodies
were buried
because again just like you have a
witness to who put the baby in the oven
the kids themselves were doing all this
hard labor right
the priests were lazy you know the
church leaders
these schools were lazy they weren't
going to dig the grave they'd forced
these kids to dig the rift so there's
some memory
of where the bodies have been uh
have been buried
um the residential schools
you know partly have to be remembered
for what they did
and they partly have to be remembered
for what they failed to do
what they did was you know forced
assimilation attempted genocide
murder rape torture genuinely by the
strictest definition i've read accounts
of
torture in the most literal sense of
these
but what did they fail to do
you know they utterly failed to provide
these first nations kids
with an education that would prepare
them to succeed
in canada i mean let's be blunt in this
in
white western 20th century society or
whichever century you want to talk about
and on the contrary of course they did
also traumatize these kids but they also
just raised them
in a deeply dysfunctional situation
where they were separated from their own
parents and they weren't provided with
some kind of loving family to replace
those parents
they were raised you know in this very
very
uh strange and psychologically damning
set of circumstances
that explains to a great extent the mass
drug addiction
mass gang affiliation mass anti-social
and
self-destructive behavior that that
generation went out to do even
even for people who were not victims of
rape you know or torture or something
being taken away from their family at
such a young age and subjected to such
extreme and bizarre
conditions they failed to provide
an education that any of us would
voluntarily
enroll our own students it's going to
mention a circumstance now as an
imperfect parallel
all comparisons are odious all parallels
aren't perfect we have 31
people in the audience guys if we could
get 31 thumbs up more people will join
us we'll get some more questions in the
recording
i make zero money out of this but if
you're here you can hit the thumbs up
if you change your mind later you can do
the thumbs down instead
especially in third world countries it
is quite
common to have a prison with a
kindergarten attached
so women are sent to prison does that
happened in wealthy countries also but
it's especially common at their owners
women are sent to prison and they're
pregnant
at the time they happen to get sentenced
or
while they're in prison
somehow one way or another they managed
to get pregnant
maybe during a visit from their husband
or loved one maybe with one of the
prison guards
whatever the situation may be pregnancy
in prison
is a reality and 20 percent so a lot of
these prisons will then set up
a kind of kindergarten so the women are
not
immediately separated from their
children
now you might have another situation
what if a woman is is
nine months pregnant at the time she
sentenced to go to prison or maybe she's
just given birth at the time she's
she completes her case do you want to
separate
this child's that has to be raised by
its grandparents or some remote relative
maybe there are no remote relatives
maybe this child is going to become a
total orphan
if you separate from his mother or do
you want to have some facilities in the
prison
so the woman can serve her jail sentence
and the child can go to kindergarten or
the child can
can go to school okay
what happens if the prison guards
are sending their children to a separate
kindergarten
to a separate school and what happens
if you pass a law if you pass a rule
that you know what the prison guards
the prison administration everyone all
the way up to the top
grass we all have to share the same
kindergarten we all have to share the
same school
you know there will be pressure there
will be the most
positive part of me the most powerful
pressure imaginable to improve
conditions
at that school at that kindergarten
right
if the prison guards themselves have to
put their own kids in the same classes
with the children of the prisoners
and if not if you decide that no no no
we're going to have two separate schools
we're going to have two separate
candidates we're going to have
separate but equal education systems you
are going to get
separate but very unequal education
systems
in part because the parents of the
children
in those two systems education have very
unequal abilities
to leverage influence in the government
they have very
different abilities to advocate on their
own behalf on behalf of children the
very different abilities even to stand
up and complain
to the teacher now i just say
i have dealt many times in my life with
well-intentioned
left-of-center people
who do not imagine themselves to be
racist
and who will say that they think it is
just fine and dandy
for different ethnic groups and
different religions
to have separate schools to have
separate institutions to have
separate political representation they
have separate political organizations
and they don't realize to what extent
they are actually endorsing the politics
of segregation
um they do not realize to what extent
they are recreating the racism
that for many years the united states
america was excused
under this doctrine of of separate but
equal
all right separate never means equal
the only way we can be equal
is by being equal together
the simplest way to have guaranteed
that our first nations people received
the same quality of education
as the most elite white english speaking
people in the country would have been
to send them to the same schools
anyone who would make excuses
for sending out six-year-olds again
actually malnourished actually starving
out to do hard labor
at the crack of dawn on this farm we're
on this orchard having this kids do all
the yard work
uh having the kids clean the bathrooms i
mean
these seem like small things but they're
not right at the school for white people
the children weren't doing that kind of
hard life
right at the school for white people
children were being fed by their own
parents not by the
not by the teachers not by the the
priests and nuns
right if you just put this in the
comparative focus of saying okay well
what if it was
your child what if you as the prime
minister of canada
what if you as a senator in canada what
if you
as a member of parliament account what
if your kids
actually literally were to attend the
same school
as first nations children okay we can't
be separate but equal the only way
to be equal is for all of us to endure
the consequences of the same political
decisions together
and we still don't have this in canada
in canada we have separate schools for
the rich and poor
we have separate schools for the english
and french
for anglophones and francophones we have
separate schools
for catholics we have separate schools
for
italian catholics and portuguese
catholics
we have separate schools for muslims we
have separate schools
for jews we have separate schools for
first nations people
which schools do you think are the best
schools
which schools do you think are the worst
by any metric
by any evaluation right
um
i was born in 1907
so i was 12 years old
approximately the year 1990
going through my teenage years
in the 1990s i knew
i knew all this stuff i knew
what had happened to our native people
at the residential schools i wasn't some
brilliant independent researcher i
wasn't publishing a book
you know i i didn't have connections to
the cia or any secret source
information i knew right everybody knew
coming back to this imperfect
comparison to the holocaust in germany
i hinted at two very different routes
for the transmission of that knowledge
of what was going on the supposedly
secret labor camps supposedly secret
death camps that weren't
weren't a secret at all right on the one
hand what about the people who actually
worked there
now the people who worked in canada's
residential schools they weren't ashamed
of themselves
they didn't treat it as a secret they
were proud
we had a really weird controversy
with a guy who had been a gym teacher at
the residential schools he taught
physical education and he had gone on to
be one of these
shady bureaucrats
in the olympic committee system so you
no matter what country you live in the
world you've had
some scandals about this the corruption
and what is this olympic committee and
how does it work and who are these
people who become administrators and
bureaucrats it's really weird and
there's there's money involved
money fame power respect sometimes sex
right so this guy had gone from being a
gym teacher in the residential schools
to be
and you know nobody looked into his
background and nobody looked into what
he did
but you know the point is this was
openly proclaimed on his resume this was
his
you know he was proud he had worked at a
school with so many hundred students
he had been the gym teacher he had been
part of
you know the number of people
employed at these schools and for the
vast dream it wasn't a job for life
right they had another job before they
went on to another job afterward
and they were connected to larger and
larger social units
through the greatest megaphone that
canadian society
had to offer at that time and still the
most powerful unit for social
organization
in canadian politics today
the church
i was in victoria the last time we had
elections
when was that four years ago i i don't
want to know and
we were here almost four years ago i
think it was like three three and a half
years ago
a long time ago now we were here for
elections some time ago
and you know i wanted to run
i wanted to stand for office i went and
looked at the paperwork i needed to be a
candidate
in the elections we allegedly have new
elections coming up in canada now
allegedly just a few months from now we
don't know yet it's still
uncertain you know and
let's say i needed 150 signatures you
know
it might have been as little as 70
signatures but you needed a certain
number of signatures
all provided to you by people who live
in the same
little area of canada the same writing
legally speaking so
this is walking distance like when we
walk a short distance
from where we live uh west or south we
cross a boundary into a different
writing
so you had to know it let's say it was
70 people you had to know 70 people
willing to sign a piece of paper to say
yes you should be a candidate you should
stand in elections
let me just say i have no delusion that
i would win
if i were to stand an election if i were
to participate in election
it would be a platform where i could
address
some of these political issues talking
about right now including first nations
you name it you know are there a lot of
political issues i would like to speak
on
and if only a few hundred people hear me
that's a worthwhile use of my time
same comment about this video a few
hundred people will hear and appreciate
this video
it's worth my time it's worth my efforts
my small way of making the world a
better place
so i wanted to stand up for election
it would have been completely impossible
for me
with an audience of 10 000 subscribers
on youtube i forget 200 supporters on
patreon some of this i'm not some huge
success
it would have been completely impossible
for me to get the signatures i need
at that local level from people living
within milwaukee distance
myself whereas
some eccentric religious fundamentalists
who will never get 10 000
subscribers on youtube who will never
get 200 supporters on patreon
some local wingnut at the church
any church he can get 70 signatures
he can get 150 signatures and stand for
election
right it's very powerful the church
still today in 201 as a unit of social
organization without digressing into
this too much but it's
let's let's be real look at
black lives matter
black lives matter is a concept black
lives matter is a hashtag
when you look at the people who are
actually making a difference
in those police brutality cases
case-by-case basis example example
almost every single time
you find that in reality there is a
local church pastor
who started talking about the issue that
like the particular police officer or
the particular
event the particular problem and he
started doing fundraising
on the issue and if you can just turn to
a congregation of 500 people
at your church and say look guys i need
everyone to donate 10
so we can pay this lawyer and probably
for the lawyer also
the the fame and promotion he gets
through your church is significant
like the lawyer won't do this completely
anonymously but oh okay this church
group supports it
i'm gonna get on the news maybe the
lawyer will lower his fees something for
this reason pro bono
okay this church can motivate a lawyer
this church can do a fundraiser
and get five thousand dollars to pay the
lawyer this
church can take the issue to the state
government the city government the
police department
right the the church and specifically
the united states america we were
talking about like
black african-american protestant
churches getting organized
all right black lives matter is an
abstract concept it's a hashtag
yes there's a very small number of
marxists
who technically controlled the
organization such as it is right
but the reality is with most of these
cases the real political activism the
real difference is being made by
by church groups okay so the people
who worked in the residential school
system
i grew up in the 1990s i can remember
them
phoning in to radio talk shows
with pride and talking about the work
they did
in the forcible assimilation of our
native people this stuff wasn't a secret
it wasn't covered up people didn't think
it was an atrocity
okay part of the reason i was able to
know about it was that it was so
open okay and these people were
connected to communities
they were connected to a larger audience
everyone put it
through the church the catholics to the
catholic church
the anglicans to the anglo church many
of them
their career was in the church and just
one part of their career
was in first nations education in
residential schools
you know others had careers as
teachers okay public school teachers are
very highly paid
in canada public school teachers are
leaders of political opinion they're
prominent members of their community
people have a captive audience they talk
to parents they talk to kids
some of them were career teachers and
they just had a period of their life as
teachers
in the residential school system
everybody knew
everybody knew partly because this is a
small country
and a significant percentage of
the affluent population people like
teachers
people like leaders of the church choir
shall we say right were actually
employed
in this project directly or indirectly
this is one way
and the other way that people knew just
like i was saying a minute ago
about adolf hitler writing mein kampf
is that the policies themselves were
openly
and actively proclaimed by the
government
can we stop pretending that this was a
secret right like there was propaganda
to promote this project there was
recruitment i mean for every one person
who gets a job like that there are other
people get interviewed for the job
right this was a huge coast-to-coast
transformative project the government
did plenty
of open propaganda about and
another wrinkle this links to what is
referred to in canada as the 60s scoop
if you don't know the slang don't worry
about it the 60s scoop okay
they actually wanted to motivate you
like the average person in the audience
to get involved
with forced assimilation by adopting
a first nations child that had been
taken away from its parents
right this is associated with the decade
of the 1960s but it went on and on
all right when i was a kid
the prime minister of canada had adopted
a first nations child forcibly taken
away from his family because they
weren't orphans
this is not worth describing those three
it was a form of force assimilation
to separate children from their parents
and have to have them raised by which
one and the deputy prime minister
also had a child who was in this way
separated from the family
these people they were directly tainted
by they were directly touched by
this experience and in both of those
cases
um you know i don't want to defame these
guys but i followed it
and and it was not in the newspapers the
newspapers in canada are all
tightly controlled by the government you
had to go to alternate
sources of of information like frank
magazine there's a cultural reference
and we were frank magazine you had to go
to either frank magazine or the actual
first nations
publications themselves um to find out
this kind of stuff because
you wouldn't get in the mainstream press
but you know um
those kids that were adopted by
politicians
they had very troubled lives let's put
it that way they had criminal charges
against them
and then their parents got involved in
evading the criminal charges and they
had
drug problems and sexual problems
there were scandals attached to those
kids that were in canada
completely successfully suffocated the
news but the point is
not only was this not secret it was
something the government at that time
was not ashamed of
it was something that was actively
propounded and proclaimed as being a
positive government policy
and it was a government policy they were
trying to motivate you
to join in that you should join in this
great effort that united all of white
canada
in forcibly assimilating the native
people
okay
and i just want to say i didn't just
know
about the government [ __ ] right
i knew about the failure of that program
to achieve its positive goals
like sorry living in downtown toronto
have you ever had an ojibwe person as
your dentist
oh gee i've i've seen korean dentists
i've seen chinese dentists
we have g we have dentists from all
around the world we have medical doctors
from india and pakistan why do you think
we have no medical doctors who are
ojibwe
why do we have no medical doctors who
are mohawk why do you think that is
you know talk about nurses or dental
hygienists
we have swedish nurses we have russian
nurses we have filipina nurses nurses
some places like portugal someone you
know within europe
gee is isn't it funny isn't it funny
that we just don't have any first
nations people
whose education is prepared to take on
that role and let's be clear a job like
that as humble as it may be
to become a nurse it eliminates poverty
in one generation
okay you can you can go think of these
things ancestrally right
you can go from being a poverty stricken
family
to being an affluent family in one
generation if the transitional
generation
either the mother or the father or both
are employed as a nurse
it is simply a highly paying enough job
to make that transition
out of poverty that's one of the reasons
why it is such an important
form of employment for new immigrants
you know they know if this generation
works as a nurse
the next generation is going to have
every opportunity imaginable to do
whatever they want to do not that you're
going to be rich but you will definitely
not be
poor if you take on the uh take on the
path
of being a nurse in downtown toronto
i'd had every ethnicity imaginable
interact with me over the counter of a
bank
as a bank teller jamaicans
never once never once did i have a bank
teller
who was cree ojibwe mohawk danny first
nations
i knew about the rape
i knew about the murder i knew about the
disappearances
in the 1990s i knew about
all this stuff all right i knew
my parents before me
if they didn't know
it was a choice
what we're left to deal with in 2021
is the question of why so many people
made that
choice including you know supposedly
well-intentioned
left-wing people like my parents by the
way if you look at my father's
formal publications he published many
books it says all this positive stuff
about first nations people it's there in
print you can quote him
saying kind of anti-racist pro-first
nation stuff it's there on paper
but it's paper thin homie
the whole episode you know tells you a
lot
about what canadian culture was and what
it is
let me just get the year on the rcap
uh it's definitely been more than 20
years
oh wow so there you go that's perfect
for my analysis
um so the royal commission on aboriginal
peoples
rcap i'd i'd forgotten the year i
thought it would have been about 1995.
so that got started in 1991
and it finished but when it finished
uh was significant that when it started
i'll just say why in a moment
in 1996.
okay wow so great i was just going to
say
the royal commission on aboriginal
peoples rcap okay
so this is 1991 to 1996. if you wanted
to know about the rapes if you wanted to
know about the murderer if you wanted to
know about the torture if you want to
know any of those details
that was all set down for you real
clearly by the world commission
for aboriginal peoples so you know how
could you not know
how could you not uh care
okay so an interesting question here
from almighty om so almighty ohm says
quote
i may have helped you at your bank i
could not put my proper name on my
business card or say i was fluent
never mind having a grandmother who gave
up her status to marry we had to hide
so this was someone who had some
aboriginal ancestry and some claim to
legal status
i'm presuming this is someone who did
not grow up actually with
indian status on an indian status card
that was the term guys
sorry i'm saying indian wasn't racist
that literally
for the government represented it was
called the indian agent the department
of indian affairs you know indian was
the
it was though it was the word um so this
is someone who didn't have status and
someone who
who in effect you know disguised
themselves
well i knew people with the opposite
story
too where they looked
first nations they looked aboriginal
they looked indigenous
and they were treated as indigenous by
the cops
you know like they were insulted for
being averaging with cops
but within their own family there was no
story there was no explanation for this
they didn't know
where this came from and they didn't
know themselves if they were the
products like one generation back
of the the 1960s scoop the 60 scoop this
kind of um
forced adoption program or what where it
really
it really wasn't clear so almighty oma
is getting at an interesting
question what about indigenous people
who can
pass for white um
so i had a friend in saskatchewan and
her name was
osawa i just mentioned that's how she
pronounced it herself
she was not crazy she was soto so
there is more than one way to interpret
soto and in modern english put it that
way
so her name was osognu
and i was with her when she phoned a
taxi
company and so at that time i don't
think this has changed that much but
these days more and more of it is done
through an app she called for a taxi and
they asked for her name so can we get
your first name
for when the taxi arrived and she didn't
use a nickname she didn't use a
whiteboard and she said oh
no now we
we have a culture here in white english
speaking canada that's
tremendously understanding when people
want to use a chinese name or a
pakistani name or something
but it's remarkable how little patience
we have for uh for first nations
aboriginal names aboriginal
and sister and so on so almightyon says
that her father was raised in the
reserve with no status
she spoke uh both languages uh
but she could pass so yeah
so no i know there are a lot of people
who who fall in the
in the cracks this way and you know
anyway sorry it's kind of a different
topic but one of the questions
is how how optimistic is anyone about
that being the future
of first nations identity for me both
the optimism and the pes
pessimism ultimately are linked to
language you know i just i just don't
see
dna as being the the focus
of you know what in the 21st century
what in the 21st century does first
nation status mean
or status in any sense you know um i
think it has to
revolve around the language as the
touchstone of identity i knew a white
guy and he was
very white uh he was like white skinned
with red hair
just imagine he was very obvious he was
a
i don't know if he was a scottish
ancestor or what but he grew up entirely
on a first nations reservation and his
father i'm sorry
distant memory his father was something
like the electrician for the first
nations it was something like that like
his father had a job on the reservation
of that kind i would guess electrician
and handyman repairing things
so he was a white kid who grew up
entirely on a first native revision all
of his friends
growing up were first nations and then
he lives
you know in between two worlds but
you know we spoke no language but
english right
so you know you know that's where you're
from
but obviously it'd be very different if
that guy had grown up and he was fluent
in korea or he was fluent in
ojibwe or or anything else he would have
a different different impact for him
different impact for the for the future
of the country you know
um
all right so he's going to say the royal
commission aboriginal peoples
this is the grand canadian tradition of
having a so-called
fact-finding mission and an inquiry and
it making absolutely no
difference whatsoever and it's sinking
down to being the level of a
footnote known only by academics
you know but the world commission
aboriginal peoples it concluded with a
list of recommendations let's say it was
120 recommendations maybe it was 200
recommendations
but there was sort of the final
conclusion was this list of things they
were supposed to do
so i was still a kid in 1996
but nevertheless you know my response to
that i remember reading
the list and i was furious because i
felt like this wasn't going to change
anything at all
i thought this is too namby pamby this
is too conciliatory like we need
fundamental change for the status of
first nations in canada
20 years later you look back at that
list none of it happened
none of the recommendations were
followed nothing happened
of course i assumed naively in 96 these
recommendations this is what the
government was now going to take as
their plan
of action to transform the status of
first nations people in canada
nope you know nothing happened nothing
changed
and now you look back on it you think
about what a better world it might be
today
if in 1996 the government had taken that
kind of that kind of positive uh
that kind of positive action you know um
all right so there's there's some more
stuff that would be interesting to
respond uh
everyone knew nobody did anything about
it
why i think that most people
left or right
dabble in politics
wanting to feel powerful
wanting to feel important
and being afraid of or avoiding
a sense of powerlessness a sense of
impotence
a sense of their own insignificance in
the world
my parents climbed
over the fence
in ottawa at the parliament building
to tear down the american flag and burn
it
in front of the prime minister of canada
and the president united states
who were behind the window looking out
at them
as they did this it was a rare occasion
where
the president united states was visiting
canada
obviously they could have gone to jail
or been beaten up by the cops
my father subscribed to the theory
that the cops had been told to stand
back
and let it happen that it was
politically convenient for the prime
minister of canada to say look
you can see how much the people here are
against you
you know perhaps to say look this is why
canada can't do more
to help you in vietnam or whatever
interesting theory
on my father's part all right
my parents were people who felt
powerful who felt important
taking a stand on vietnam taking
take this is this great phrase we have
in english taking a stand
what does it mean it's ridiculous taking
a stand on laos
taking a stand on cambodia
parts of the world places they were
perfectly ignorant of oh they were
absolutely ignorant of those places
and i think of course strategically and
morally what they had to say about those
places was completely wrong
but it made them feel powerful it made
them feel
important
[Music]
so the problem is
weakness perceived as strength
strength perceived as weakness
right because my parents
and millions of people in their
generation
would have felt weak would have felt
embarrassed
would have felt out of place getting in
their cars
and driving to a first nations
reservation and saying hey
you know i understand you guys are going
through this terrible
transition here i understand there's
this crisis i understand this room and i
want to help
and maybe maybe i'm not sure how
i can help you know
i want to get involved and maybe you
don't just drive your car there once
maybe you go back again and again and
maybe it's difficult and maybe it's
awkward
and maybe those people speak english
with difficulty
with a certain accent you find very
difficult to decipher
at first and maybe a lot of them
are alcoholics and maybe a lot of them
are overweight and maybe they don't wear
fashionable clothes the way people do in
toronto
or montreal right like this is the
shallowness people have
in politics i remember reading a comment
on the internet this was one of the many
times in which i considered becoming a
lawyer
and i was looking around for advice
about going to law school
specific things i was googling about
going to law school
i found this comment from a guy saying
young people today have an idea of being
a lawyer
and an activist that comes from the tv
show ally mcbeal
as a cultural reference
i hope it's been forgotten
and he said i mean it's shallow but it's
really true they assume they are going
to live
a life with
surrounded by beautiful well-dressed
fashionable people having
witty dialogue and you know
sitting down in boardroom meetings and
coming to
sudden decisive decisions about issues
of great importance more
legal and political issues and this is
not what working in the law
is like at all all right i think that
and look
i'll speak about my own father um
my father grew up with photographs in
time a magazine
photographs in life magazine photographs
in the newspaper
we've all seen him
always a beautiful young woman painted
with flowers
and either naked or in a bikini at a
peace protest whether it was a peace
protest
or a concert right there is absolutely
no doubt
in my mind that my father got involved
with
radical politics because of the good
looking women
that were on the cover of the newspaper
and if you go to those protests there
are enough
good looking if you go to a protest in
downtown montreal
or downtown toronto or ottawa i mean you
guys know this people go to vegan
protests for that reason
obviously if you're a heterosexual woman
you can go to meet good looking men if
you're a
gay man you could go to meet good
looking gay men
and you are going with these kinds of
ally mcbeal
assumptions you're going with the
assumption that you're going to meet
witty highly educated well-spoken
sharp fashionably dressed like-minded
people
and you may not admit to yourself that
these are the incredibly shallow reasons
for your own political activism and you
may not realize
that oh you went to a fundraiser for
stop the war in vietnam or stop the war
in cambodia right this is my parents
you know one of those wars where i went
and oh wow there were all these
well-dressed attractive people oh this
is just what i was looking for
and maybe they let you get up on stage
and speak for a moment
and now you feel powerful and now you
feel influential
and now you feel important
you're perceiving weaknesses strength
the reality is you're not saving a
single
human life all right this is like uh
the lead singer of the beatles doing his
sleep-in
john john lennon sorry i'm not a beatles
fan you can tell
john lennon claiming he was saving lives
by staying in bed in a hotel in canada i
believe it was in montreal
and and giving interviews this kind of
totally passive totally
counterproductive
you know protest and you know what there
was this other cause
there was this other difference you
could have made
you could have gone to the residential
schools
you could have asked yourself would i
put my kid in this residential school
you could have asked who hired these
teachers who evaluated them what
qualifications these people have
oh well guess guess what you know in
canada
we don't have separation of church and
state the united states has that
principle in their constitution
right in canada we don't have separation
of church and state we have the
church and state working together hand
in glove
we have the state handing out contracts
to the church right and we have the
state paying for and installing stained
glass windows
in church buildings on first nations
reservations
shamelessly right again that's
that's an issue my parents could have
made a difference in not overnight not
instantly
they could have become lifelong decade
by decade crusaders are saying hey look
there's something fundamentally immoral
and evil and wrong here
about having separate schools for
catholics and protestants about having
separate schools
for different ethnic groups having
separate schools for rich in the poor
separate schools for first nations and
europeans
right and there's something profoundly
evil
about the government of canada treating
the catholic church as its contractor
and the government of canada giving up
its legal responsibility to evaluate
the confidence of the credentials of the
teachers and put them in that position
i just mentioned i did read some of the
actual court rulings
under this heading and i remember one of
them the judge had to make a decision
about to what extent the church was
responsible as opposed to the canadian
government
on exactly this issue residential
schools for assimilation and
there was a specific area of misconduct
uh therein
you know and the judge said look
like 99 of the evil 99 of the harm
was done by the church here
but nevertheless oh oh right so and the
other side of it is church
sorry the church who presented all their
evidence for their case to you know
disclaim the responsibility and the
documents and
record of the hansard the examination
and on the other hand
the government of canada it's not just
they it's not just that the government
of canada didn't do these evil things
with its own hands or its own staff
or by giving its own direct orders but
obviously the record shows
they gave it almost no thought at all
they just didn't really
care they didn't think about it like you
know okay church will do it
no more debate no more in vigilation
you know no no uh no quality no quality
control you know what i mean no no
and but the judge said you know
fundamentally
it doesn't matter if the church is 99
responsible and the government only
signed over
only played a one percent role here
because
theoretically the responsibility
rested with the government like the the
moral
onus the order was ultimately given by
the government the higher power
the higher responsibilities for the
government and i forget if you made it a
60 40 split or a 49 51
split but he he gave the larger part of
responsibility to the government
it's like even if you didn't do this it
was your responsibility
to do it it was was your responsibility
to prevent happiness was your
responsibility
to scrutinize to evaluate to invigilate
this process that was happening and the
fact that you didn't do it
ultimately doesn't uh doesn't lower your
your culpability
all right you know
everybody knew there was a difference
that
could have been made and on a mass
scale right on a massive scale
there was total indifference and total
inaction
well simultaneously you know there was
so much activism there was so much
passion on
these other issues that came and went
making no difference
in the world
my own family was
torn apart by the israel-palestine
conflict
the green party of canada was torn apart
by the israel-palestine conflict the new
democrat party of canada the ndp
our mainstream left-of-center party has
been torn apart and still is being torn
apart
by the israel palestine conflict
everyone
wants to take a stand everyone wants to
take a stand
on the gaza strip
what what difference can you possibly
make
and what difference would it or could it
possibly make
for you to practice your sense of moral
superiority
coming in here when i say coming in here
literally at the dinner table at my
family
right at that scale or coming in here at
a party meeting for the green party or
the ndp
or at city hall in toronto or in ottawa
like
what difference can it make
for you to take a stand do you think the
fate of israel
or the fate of palestine rests in the
hand of the canadian
government and do you think it's going
to make any difference for you to
cuss out your own grandmother or
something your own aunts and uncles
fighting over this you know it's
weakness
perceived as strength and its strength
perceived as weakness
you could have made a difference you
could have made a difference
on the separation of church and state
and you know what it's the same
fundamental evil in israel
as it is in canada the fundamental
problem
israel has is that they had to make a
decision between being a democracy
and being a theocracy and they didn't
decide their government is a mix of the
two
right i mean now saudi arabia theocracy
no democracy at all right israel has a
hybrid system
right but the separation of church and
state is a fundamental problem in israel
just as it is in canada right and the
most extreme the most
obvious victims are are aboriginal
people
right and you know what the thing is
about real problems
where you can really make the difference
um
i was so i attended political events
related to this including
back in the 1990s would have been 1997
1998 like not when i was a little kid
kind of thing
but i i went to political events related
to first nations people
and one of them that i attended
somebody much older than me stood up and
told the story
by the way if you get to know first
nations people there is a culture of
telling stories
so this is another thing if you actually
go to these events there is a culture
unlike
white english speaking events where an
elderly person will stand up
and talk for like 20 30 minutes and
everyone listens continuously
it's very different from the style of
discipline there is a storytelling
culture
and often also funny stories about often
the sort of
village elder figure anyone could be
someone who's the kind of grandparent
soon as they'll tell like a 20-minute
story
just for a plot twist at the very end
that relates to the political issue
just just like that's part of the they
have their own sense of humor
you know they have their own style of
storytelling
but anyway i was at one of these
meetings someone stole that stood up and
told the story and they said you know we
had uh
we had a meeting i forget which facet of
the first nations residential school
crisis this was
addressed you know we had a meeting and
there was this white guy there
and he said that he had come to the
conclusion that the solution
was for white people to convert to the
indigenous religion
of the native people that they have to
stop being christian they have to
embrace
you know aboriginal uh religion and that
he said he was gonna lead by example he
wanted to do this
himself and he kind of caused a scene
because he was saying he was a white
person he wasn't from that region or
something
he wasn't living out near a reservation
and he was saying no you like you have
to do like you have to
you the village others you have to
arrange for me to
convert to your religion
and you can imagine the kind of anxiety
and confusion and consternation
ultimately an old woman at that meeting
again it was described to me i was heard
the story at a different meeting was
there
myself but what was described was that
this older woman said to the guy
ultimately to shut him up
look it doesn't work that way if you
want to join our religion
you have to come and live with our
community you actually have to come out
and live that's the only way to do it
you have to you know you have to move
and you have to spend serious amounts of
time attending our events like it's not
you can't just sign up you can't just
get a tattoo
plenty of people people do get a tattoo
all right
it's a totally false dichotomy
to look at this situation and say
christianity is evil
whereas the indigenous religion is good
and i've studied the indigenous religion
almost no white people
in canada have all right if the
indigenous
religion had continued uninterrupted
we would all be able to tell you
terrible
horrifying things about that religion
and what it does to people right that's
not the choice
we're facing in the year 2021 all right
the status today of that religion
having been destroyed having been given
up
by the native people right in some cases
it was taken from them against their
will
but in many cases when you start going
through the history
many of the tribes the vast majority of
people willingly and eagerly
converted to christianity another side
of the history that's very uncomfortable
to talk about
a lot of the more enthusiastic converts
a lot of them became preachers
themselves and went to the truck
went to the tribe next door and tried to
convert that tribe to christianity for a
lot of them the gospel was a huge
turning point in their religion
but a huge turning point in the history
of their culture that they really
embraced
and tragically they embraced a form of
cultural change that
destroyed them all right the status
of that religion today amongst first
nations
is something like the status of the
poetry of shakespeare
among speakers of english language okay
there is literature
there are stories you know okay but
there is no human sacrifice
anymore there is no slavery anymore
there's no torture there's no you know
the warrior culture has disappeared
people are not
fighting to the death in order to be
given a feather
that would symbolize their bravery like
so it's gone it's over they gave up
their religion in part and in part
forcibly
it was taken from them what i have to
say to christians is
you're next
what you demanded of them
we now have to demand of ourselves
you know if you think about what was
accomplished
quote unquote positively
by the residential schools right it was
the secularization
of first nations people was a totally
failed attempt
to prepare them for life in the modern
world and nobody nobody among the white
english-speaking or white
french-speaking people ever looked in
the mirror and thought oh
maybe this would be good for me maybe
this would be good for my children
maybe we also should go through
a process of confronting the feudal
and ancient past the vestiges of it that
continue
in modern life through the organized
conspiracy of the christian church
right oh geez circumcision this makes a
lot of sense
oh oh so we cut off part of our penis
to perpetuate a ritual that was written
down
and described in the old testament for
the sons of abraham
so that we will bear the mark of the
covenant
between the jewish people and god
on our launch this this makes a lot of
sense
hmm there's nothing barbaric about this
this isn't a vested no no no no
no have a
religion based on worshiping a man
who was tortured and executed by the
state
look at the poll numbers christians
are pro-capital punishment christians
are
pro-torture whereas atheists
in both the united states of america and
canada are morally opposed
to capital punishment and are morally
opposed to torture
and these these people christians walk
around with a symbol
of capital punishment a symbol
of state-sanctioned execution hanging
around their necks
all right um
[Music]
why was i so horrified back in the years
1991 to 1996
by the recommendations of the world
commission for aboriginal peoples the
rcap
right i'd say in a phrase because there
was
neither anything creative nor anything
destructive
about it in reality we need to
create a new culture and we need to
demolish
the own we need to create a new culture
and we need to demolish the old
it seems to me inexorable and
inevitable
that the conclusion we should draw from
our history of attempted genocide
against the aboriginal people is not
just about the separation of church and
state
but the abolition of the christian
religion itself
and you will look in vain
for any suggestion that this might
happen
in the conclusions the report of the
world commission
for aboriginal people you will look in
vain
for any such suggestion in the so-called
truth and reconciliation commission
i am not interested in truth
in this sense because everyone
already knew the truth in the 1990s
it wasn't a secret everyone
knew the only people who didn't know
were those who chose to disregard the
facts that were already available
at that time and i
am not interested in reconciliation
i'm interested in change